---
layout: page 

course: Civil Procedure 
title: 'Subject Matter Jurisdiction'
subtitle: 'Background on Louisville & Nashville Railroad v. Mottley'
author: Prof. Fink
affiliation: Elon Law School 
   
---

> ERASMUS L. MOTTLEY – Long a prominent and influential business man and a veteran who served most gallantly and faithfully in behalf of the Union in the Civil war, Colonel Erasmus L. Mottley is now living virtually retired in the city of Bowling Green, Warren county, Kentucky. He was born at Greensburg, Green county, Kentucky, on the 3rd of September, 1838, and is a son of James D. and Eliza L. (Hobson) Mottley, the former of whom was born at Amelia Court House, Virginia, and the latter of whom was a native of Green county, Kentucky. The Mottley family traces its ancestry back to English origin, the original progenitor in America being one Mottley, who emigrated from Kent county, England, to America in the year 1600. Mottley of Revolutionary fame was connected with the Ninth Virginia Cavalry. James D. Mottley, father of him whose name introduces this article, was an extensive slave holder and a prominent merchant in the Blue Grass state. He was the owner of about one hundred slaves prior to the inception of the Civil war. William Hobson, maternal grandfather of Colonel Mottley, was a captain in the war of 1812.
> 
> Colonel Erasmus L. Mottley was educated in the common schools of his native county and when the integrity of the nation was threatened by armed rebellion he manifested his intrinsic loyalty and public spirit by enlisting in the Union army, in the Eleventh Kentucky Volunteer Infantry. He became first a major and afterward lieutenant colonel under Generals Buell, Grant and Sherman. During the period of his commission as lieutenant colonel he had command of the regiment. The first active engagement in which he participated was at Fort Donelson. He also saw active service at the battles of Shiloh, Perryville, Stone’s River, the siege of Knoxville and the campaigns from Chattanooga to Atlanta. He was at the fall of Atlanta and returned to Bowling Green, Kentucky, on the 1st of January, 1865, having been honorably discharged from the army in January, 1865. In March, 1866, Colonel Mottley was appointed United States collector of internal revenue and retained this incumbency for a period of eleven years. At one time he was the owner of the Bowling Green Gas Company and on disposing of this concern he purchased twenty-seven hundred acres of land in Warren and Allen counties, Kentucky. Since selling his land he has lived virtually retired in Bowling Green, where he is held in high esteem by his fellow men. He is broad minded and liberal in his convictions and most generous in his attitude towards the opinions of others, his genial kindliness and marked courtesy giving him secure vantage ground in the confidence and regard of the community.
> 
> In politics the Colonel has ever been arrayed as a staunch supporter of the Republican party and in 1876 he was a candidate on the Republican ticket for representative in Congress, but owing to the normal Democratic majority in that section he was defeated. He also ran for mayor of the city, but met defeat for similar reasons. He is alert and enthusiastically in sympathy with all measures projected for the advancement of the welfare of his home city and state. He is affiliated with various fraternal and social organizations of representative character and he is a communicant of the Protestant Episcopal church. His wife is a member of the First Baptist church of Bowling Green.
> 
> On the 12th of January, 1865, was solemnized the marriage of Colonel Mottley to Miss Anna Elizabeth Hawkins, who was born in Bowling Green, Kentucky, and who is a daughter of Colonel Percival B. Hawkins, a native of Virginia, where he was born November 17, 1817. Colonel Hawkins moved to Kentucky and became a prominent lawyer and business man in Bowling Green. He served two terms in the lower house of the state legislature and acquitted himself with honor as a colonel in the Eleventh Kentucky Volunteer Infantry during the strenuous period of the Civil war. Colonel and Mrs. Mottley became the parents of four children, concerning whom the following brief data are entered here – Elite, who is now the wife of Ely Adams, of Bowling Green; Percival, who is engaged in the milling business at Bowling Green; Charles P., who is in the lumber business and who resides at Kamloops, British Columbia; and Nan, who is the wife of Judge Milliken, of Bowling Green, Kentucky. Colonel Mottley is president of the Bowling Green Milling Company, manufacturers of flour and meal.

Source: E. Polk Johnson, A History of Kentucy & Kentuckians (1912 Lewis Publishing Co. 1912)

Mottley appears to have been involved in another case just prior to his more famous suit against the Louisville & Nashville Railroad. The case involved a dispute over the priority of payments to creditors of an insolvent bank, for which an E.L. Mottley was appointed as bankruptcy trustee. _Smith v. Mottley,_ 150 F. 266 (6th Cir. 1906), reversing _In re P.J. Potter's Sons,_ 143 F. 407 (W.D. Ky. 1906). 