---
layout: case

course: Civil Procedure 
title: 'In re Kunstler'
cite: '914 F.2d 505'
jurisdiction: '4th Cir.'
published: '1990'
panel: "Before Chapman, Wilkinson & Wilkins, Circuit Judges"
judge: "Chapman, Circuit Judge"
    
---


Three attorneys appeal the award of Rule 11 sanctions against them in the amount of $122,834.28. Appellants were sanctioned following the dismissal of a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 action, in which they represented certain plaintiffs seeking monetary damages and injunctive relief from the Governor of North Carolina, a number of North Carolina district attorneys, a sheriff, certain State Bureau of Investigation officers, the State Attorney General and others for an allegedly improper state criminal prosecution and harassment. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand with instructions.


# I

The appellant attorneys are Barry Nakell, a professor at the University of North Carolina School of Law; Lewis Pitts, Director of the Christic Institute South, a public interest law firm in Carrboro, North Carolina; and [William Kunstler](http://archive.pov.org/disturbingtheuniverse/background/), a nationally known civil rights attorney. The § 1983 action was connected with the appellants' earlier representation of two American Indians, Eddie Hatcher and Timothy Jacobs, in a federal criminal case.

On February 1, 1988, Hatcher and Jacobs staged an [armed takeover of _The Robesonian,_](https://exhibits.lib.unc.edu/exhibits/show/indians-take-back-robeson) a local newspaper in Robeson County, North Carolina. Hatcher and Jacobs held twenty hostages and charged the State District Attorney and the Sheriff's Office with corruption and criminal misconduct. Hatcher and Jacobs surrendered to federal authorities in exchange for a promise that a Governor's Task Force would investigate their complaints. The Task Force ultimately announced that it had found no evidence to support Hatcher's and Jacobs' charges.

Hatcher and Jacobs were acquitted of federal criminal charges on October 14, 1988, but North Carolina District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt announced that Hatcher and Jacobs might face state indictments. Soon after that announcement, Hatcher began a petition drive seeking to have Hubert and Kevin Stone removed from the Sheriff's Office. The Robeson Defense Committee, which had supported Hatcher in his federal trial, supported the petition drive. In November 1988, newspaper reports indicated that the State Bureau of Investigation (SBI) was investigating whether there had been a conspiracy in the takeover of _The Robesonian._

Appellants Barry Nakell and [Lewis Pitts](https://www.newsobserver.com/news/politics-government/article55333800.html) contacted the Attorney General's office to express their concern that SBI agents would intimidate citizens who were working with Hatcher in the petition drive. The Attorney General responded that no action would be taken by his office because he did not believe that the SBI was engaged in any abuse of process. Attorney Nakell alleges that the Deputy Attorney General orally admitted that the decision was political.

Attorney Pitts volunteered legal assistance to anyone on the Robeson Defense Committee subjected to harassment because of their participation in the petition drive. Appellants allege that six members of the Defense Committee contacted Attorneys Pitts and Nakell with claims of harassment by SBI agents and the Sheriff's Department, primarily involving surveillance and questioning.

On December 6, 1988, Hatcher and Jacobs were indicted on state charges. After the indictment, Jacobs fought extradition from New York. Hatcher was in federal custody in California.

By late December 1988, appellants contend that they believed that Jacobs' extradition, the pending state prosecutions, and an alleged pattern of activity by the District Attorney and his staff, members of the Sheriff's Department, and the SBI raised constitutional concerns which could only be resolved by a civil suit, because public officials were unresponsive. Appellants contend that they also believed that there was an illegal campaign to split Jacobs from Hatcher, and to interfere with Jacobs' right to counsel by persuading him to hire local counsel.

Attorneys Pitts and Nakell contend that they initially refrained from filing the complaint in hopes of enhancing Jacobs' plea bargaining opportunities, but Mr. Nakell filed the complaint on January 31, 1989, the eve of the one-year anniversary of the armed takeover of _The Robesonian,_ and he called a press conference to announce the filing. An amended complaint, signed by all three appellants, was filed on March 16, 1989.

The suit named eight plaintiffs, including various members of the Robeson Defense Committee, and Jacobs and Hatcher. The thirty-page amended complaint names nineteen defendants, including two district attorneys and members of their staffs, five SBI agents, the SBI Director, the Sheriff of Robeson County and five Deputy Sheriffs, the Attorney General of North Carolina, and the Governor of North Carolina. The complaint alleges First Amendment and Sixth Amendment violations concerning an alleged campaign of intimidation of political activity, and efforts to induce Jacobs to testify against Hatcher. All defendants were sued in their official and individual capacities, except the Governor, who was named only in his official capacity in a count seeking an injunction against extradition. The complaint also sought injunctions against the pending state criminal prosecutions, and against the defendants' harassment and interference with the attorney-client relationship established by Jacobs. The complaint sought damages against all individually named defendants and Robeson County.

After the case was filed, appellants sought expedited discovery to depose defendant SBI agent Bowman, who was the case agent in the state's pending criminal action against Jacobs and Hatcher. The defendants moved for a protective order claiming that discovery was improperly sought to obtain information concerning the state criminal proceedings, which plaintiffs could not otherwise obtain. The district court did not rule on this motion prior to the dismissal of the case. In late March 1989, Jacobs, having failed in resisting extradition, was returned to North Carolina. In April, Jacobs agreed to a plea bargain. Appellants contend that a variety of events then caused them to reevaluate the viability of their civil suit, and to conclude that dismissal was appropriate.

On April 20, Mr. Nakell called Joan Byers, a Special Deputy Attorney General, seeking defendants' approval to a stipulated dismissal under Rule 41(a)(1)(ii). Byers would not stipulate to a dismissal under Rule 41(a)(1), but authorized appellants to state that defendants did not object to a dismissal under Rule 41(a)(2). Appellants proceeded under Rule 41(a)(2), and the order dismissing the case was entered on May 2, 1989.

On June 13, 1989, the state defendants filed their Rule 11 motion, and the county defendants filed a similar motion for sanctions on July 5. On August 8, appellants responded to the Rule 11 motions and requested an evidentiary hearing. On September 5, appellants filed a Rule 11 motion seeking sanctions against the appellees. On September 8, the court heard arguments of counsel and shortly thereafter requested submissions by defendants' counsel of their fees and expenses. On September 29, the district court imposed Rule 11 sanctions upon appellants, and dismissed appellants' Rule 11 motion. Sanctions against appellants included full fees and costs of $92,834.28 and $10,000 additional sanctions against each appellant based upon the baseless claims which appellants had taken care to publicize. We affirm the district court's findings that appellants violated all three prongs of Rule 11, but vacate and remand for reconsideration of the appropriate sanction.


[ * * * ]

# III

# Violations of Rule 11

Rule 11 states, in relevant part:

> The signature of an attorney or party constitutes a certificate by the signer that the signer has read the pleading, motion, or other paper; that to the best of the signer's knowledge, information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law, and that it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation.... If a pleading, motion, or other paper is signed in violation of this rule, the court, upon motion or upon its own initiative, shall impose upon the person who signed it, a represented party, or both, an appropriate sanction, which may include an order to pay to the other party or parties the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred because of the filing of the pleading, motion, or other paper, including a reasonable attorney's fee.

The district court found that the three appellants violated all three prongs of Rule 11 by failing to make a reasonable inquiry to determine that the complaint stood well grounded in fact and warranted by existing law, and by filing the complaint for an improper purpose. We review all aspects of the district court's Rule 11 determinations under an abuse-of-discretion standard.

[ * * * ]

## B. Well Grounded in Fact

The district court based sanctions in part on a violation of the first prong of Rule 11 — finding that the complaint was not well grounded in fact. An objective test is used "to determine the reasonableness of a lawyer's prefiling investigation." _Southern Leasing Partners, Ltd. v. McMullan,_ 801 F.2d 783, 788 (5th Cir.1986). Mr. Nakell and Mr. Pitts have argued that they had "an intimate knowledge of the county and its people; factors which made them ... professionally capable of assimilating and weighing the facts gathered prior to filing the civil suit." In light of that knowledge, the factual inaccuracies in the complaint are even more egregious.

The district court noted numerous misstatements of fact, such as the assertion that the district attorney "serves as the criminal prosecution arm of Defendant Robeson County and as such makes policy in police investigation and criminal prosecution matters for Defendant Robeson County." In fact, N.C.G.S. §§ 7A-61 _et seq._ indicates that the District Attorney is an officer of the state, not an agent nor an employee of the county. Contrary to the complaint, defendants Britt, Townsend, and Sampson, and the District Attorney's staff, are state officers, not agents or employees of Robeson County. The complaint alleges that District Attorney Britt refused and failed to discipline, train and supervise the Sheriff's deputies "under their control and supervision." District Attorneys possess no such power or responsibility.

Appellants acknowledge some errors, but contend they are "isolated" and thus do not warrant sanctions. We do not agree with this characterization. The errors pervade the complaint and concern information which either was or should have been known to appellants. The errors provide a false foundation for appellants' allegation of a county-wide "conspiracy," and are central to the complaint. Appellants also suggest that, under _Pembaur v. Cincinnati,_ 475 U.S. 469 (1986), state officials can sometimes establish county policy for purposes of § 1983 liability. Unlike _Pembaur,_ there is no provision of North Carolina law which suggests that the state officials in this case either could or did act to establish county policy.

Other causes of action were founded on allegations which utterly lacked any basis in fact. For example, the complaint alleged that the Governor, the Attorney General and District Attorney entered into a "no state prosecution" agreement, and this agreement was breached when the state prosecution commenced. The district court found that prior to filing their complaint, appellants

> had access to the transcript of the negotiations leading to the hostage release agreement as well as a copy of the written agreement. Nothing in the agreement ... or in any of the negotiations, suggests an agreement that Hatcher and Jacobs would not face North Carolina charges, and none of the negotiators had the authority to so agree.

Moreover, North Carolina law does not grant the Governor or the State Attorney General the power to bind the state not to prosecute. Neither the Attorney General nor District Attorney Britt played any role in the hostage negotiations, but appellants now argue that unspecified evidence, obtainable through discovery, "could show" that a no prosecution agreement was made. While a lawyer may rely on discovery to reveal _additional_ facts to support claims which are well grounded in fact, Rule 11 sanctions are appropriate when a lawyer attempts to use discovery to support outrageous and frivolous claims for which there is _no_ factual support. Unsubstantiated claims such as these constitute an abuse of the judicial process for which Rule 11 sanctions were designed.

Appellants appear to have relied entirely upon discovery in the hope of finding some factual support for many of their claims. In their Memorandum and Opposition to Defendants' Motion for a Protective Order, appellants wrote:

> Plaintiffs anticipate that as a result of [deposing SBI defendant Bowman] they will be in a position to apply to the Court for temporary injunctive relief and make the showing required by Rule 65(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

Appellants requested a temporary restraining order in their complaint. Rule 65(b) makes clear that a temporary restraining order may be granted only if

> it clearly appears from specific facts shown by affidavit or by the verified complaint that immediate and irreparable injury, loss, or damage will result to the applicant before the adverse party or his attorney can be heard in opposition.

Rule 65(b) does not authorize counsel to request relief and then search through discovery for facts to support the relief already requested. The rule requires that "specific facts" be _"shown"_ to the court _with_ the request for relief. We agree with the district court that the appellants' request for relief and their indication that they were not "in a position to make the showing required by Rule 65(b)" without later discovery indicates an unacceptable level of pre-filing investigation.

We affirm the district court's findings that many of the allegations against state and local officials "have nothing to do with this case ... and are factually unsubstantiated." Allegations which suggest that the Sheriff is engaged in drug trafficking and that a black inmate died while in the Sheriff's custody are irrelevant. These allegations involve no injury to the plaintiffs, and the report of drug trafficking by the Sheriff's Office is wholly unsupported in fact. Appellants protest that these allegations were represented in the complaint only as beliefs of their clients, but this does not make them relevant to the complaint or less scandalous in nature. While irrelevant allegations, standing alone, may not be cause for Rule 11 sanctions, the existence of numerous irrelevant, unsubstantiated, and sensational allegations is an appropriate factor for a district court to consider in determining whether the pleading as a whole lacks adequate factual foundation.

In this case, the complaint was filled with irrelevant allegations not tied to specific injuries to plaintiffs, _i.e.,_ general allegations of abusive behavior against blacks and Indians, and allegations that Robeson County is beleaguered by poverty, illiteracy, and violence. There was little basis for the allegation that Britt, Townsend, Thornburg and Morgan conspired to appoint Townsend as District Attorney and to use SBI agents as political police to discredit the Republican candidate, and that allegation was again irrelevant. Hatcher and Jacobs had been indicted prior to Townsend's appointment, and none of the other candidates for District Attorney suggested that they would not continue the prosecution. Appellants' arguments as to the relevance of such allegations are tangential at best and often strain credulity.

Although Mr. Nakell and Mr. Pitts filed lengthy affidavits detailing their factual inquiry, such affidavits do not provide factual or legal support for the inaccuracies noted by the district court. The number of hours allegedly spent by counsel in prefiling investigation does not dissuade us from affirming the district court's findings of Rule 11 violations. Given the adequate time to prepare and hours allegedly spent in preparation of the complaint, appellants have presented no excuse for the many clear factual errors in this pleading.

Appellants have argued that, despite the lack of pre-filing foundation for their claims, it was appropriate to include the claims because support for them could only be obtained through discovery. In _Kraemer v. Grant County,_ 892 F.2d 686 (7th Cir.1990), the court held that sanctions were not warranted where an attorney relied on client information to support a cause of action based on a theory of conspiracy, even though additional facts were needed to prove the claim. "If discovery is necessary to establish a claim, then it is not unreasonable to file a complaint so as to obtain the right to conduct that discovery." 892 F.2d at 690. Despite this sweeping statement, there were in _Kraemer_ a number of factors cautioning against sanctions which are not present here. In _Kraemer,_ the attorney was a recent law school graduate, and had hired a private investigator to look into his client's allegations. The investigator's report did not discredit any part of the client's story and the prospective defendants refused to cooperate with the investigator. Only a single portion of the complaint — that dealing with the proof of state action — was ultimately found to be without support.

In the present case, appellants are experienced attorneys with both the time and the means to conduct a responsible factual investigation. The complaint contains myriad inaccuracies rather than a single error. Many of the factual inaccuracies could have been discovered by the most cursory investigation. The irrelevances are inexcusable considering the attorneys' experience. Indeed, it is remarkable that so many errors could have been undetected by appellants. The number of claims without factual foundation warrants sanctions, whether the errors stem from incompetency or wilful misconduct.

The need for discovery to complete the factual basis for alleged claims is not an excuse to allege claims with no factual basis. While we do not disagree with the result obtained in _Kraemer,_ we find that it is not applicable to the present case. A lawyer is an officer of the court, and he should never file a lawsuit without confidence that it has a reasonable basis in fact and is well grounded in law. For the purposes of Rule 11, the factual inquiry necessary to file a complaint is generally satisfied if all of the information which can be obtained prior to suit supports the allegations made, even though _further_ facts must be obtained through discovery to finally prove the claim. However, a complaint containing allegations unsupported by _any_ information obtained prior to filing, or allegations based on information which minimal factual inquiry would disprove, will subject the author to sanctions.


# C. Well Grounded In Law

The district court found that the complaint was not well grounded in law. We agree. Appellants contend that the strength of the legal basis of the complaint is demonstrated by their opponent's lengthy response to them, and the approval of a civil rights attorney, who reviewed and approved of, but did not sign, the complaint. The length of an opponent's response to a complaint does not validate the otherwise insubstantial claims therein, because a lengthy response may reveal less the merit of particular claims than the number of valid defenses to them. An opponent may have employed "scorched earth" tactics in composing a response far beyond what is required to oppose frivolous claims. Nor is the Rule 11 standard of whether a "reasonable attorney in like circumstances would believe his actions to be factually and legally justified" satisfied merely by having another attorney review a complaint. The reviewing attorney may be unfamiliar with the true facts of the case, the factual and legal investigation conducted, or the law relevant to the complaint.

The district court enumerated several substantial claims without legal foundation. The court found no factual or legal basis for the double jeopardy claim to the state prosecution of Hatcher and Jacobs following the federal prosecution, because a subsequent prosecution by a different sovereign plainly does not constitute double jeopardy. Although a "tool of the same authorities" exception is possible in some circumstances, that exception may only be established by proof that State officials had little or no independent volition in their proceedings. In this case, however, the complaint alleged that the state officials instituted and controlled the state proceeding, which precludes the establishment of that exception. The district court also considered a quotation attributed to Mr. Pitts in a newspaper article that the state charges did not constitute double jeopardy. Although we caution the court against relying too heavily on press reports, we do not fault the district court for considering the statement.[^2]

The district court found without legal foundation the plaintiffs' claim that Hatcher's Fifth Amendment rights were damaged when the state tried to extract testimony from Jacobs. Fifth Amendment protection is personal to the individual whose testimony is being compelled and appellants as experienced attorneys should have been well aware of this. Appellants make no attempt to explain away this glaring blunder.

Appellants sought to enjoin state criminal proceedings, but the district court found that the _Younger v. Harris_ abstention doctrine clearly barred such relief. The court also found that Hatcher and Jacobs could have presented their federal constitutional claims to the state court. We agree that plaintiffs had no factual basis for claiming that the state prosecution was brought in bad faith, or without a reasonable expectation of conviction, because Hatcher and Jacobs had never denied taking hostages. Although appellants cite an Eighth Circuit case which suggests that the _Younger_ abstention doctrine does not apply if "a prosecution was brought in retaliation for or to discourage the exercise of constitutional rights ... `regardless of whether valid convictions conceivably could be obtained,'" _Lewellen v. Raff,_ 843 F.2d 1103, 1109-10 (8th Cir.1988) that proposition has been rejected by this court. In _Suggs v. Brannon,_ 804 F.2d 274 (4th Cir.1986), we upheld the use of the _Younger_ abstention doctrine when plaintiffs claimed that their prosecution under obscenity laws chilled their First Amendment rights.

The district court also noted "serious standing problems with many of the plaintiffs' claims." For example, on the claim that the prosecution chilled Hatcher and Jacobs' First Amendment expression, the complaint presented no facts showing specific harm or threat of harm [ …]. Appellants respond that they did show concrete and specific harm insofar as plaintiffs' participation in the petition drive was curtailed. However, Hatcher and Jacob's participation was not curtailed, and the district court's observation on their standing problem with respect to that claim is valid.

We therefore affirm the court's findings that the complaint on the whole was not well grounded in law.


# D. Improper Purpose

Sanctions could have been imposed for the violations already discussed, but the district court also based the award of sanctions on appellants' improper purpose in filing the complaint. The type and number of Rule 11 violations are considered in determining the appropriate sanction, and it was proper for the district court to consider appellants' purpose. Although the district court first discussed "improper purpose" under Rule 11, whether or not a pleading has a foundation in fact or is well grounded in law will often influence the determination of the signer's purpose, and we suggest that a district court should consider the first two prongs of Rule 11 before making a determination of improper purpose.

Appellants argue that the district court's conclusions as to their purpose are clearly erroneous, because there is no evidence in the record to support the court's findings, or the findings are based on factual conclusions which were contested by affidavit. The district court concluded that sanctions would be appropriate based on the improper purpose of the lawsuit "[e]ven if the complaint had a proper legal and factual basis." Since we have affirmed the court's findings that the complaint in the instant case was not well grounded in law or in fact, we need not decide whether a complaint which is well grounded in law and in fact can be sanctioned solely on the basis that it was filed for an improper purpose. Rather, we look only to whether the court abused its discretion in finding that the complaint was filed for an improper purpose. 

Rule 11 defines the term "improper purpose" to include factors "such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the costs of litigation." The factors mentioned in the rule are not exclusive. If a complaint is not filed to vindicate rights in court, its purpose must be improper. However, if a complaint is filed to vindicate rights in court, and also for some other purpose, a court should not sanction counsel for an intention that the court does not approve, so long as the added purpose is not undertaken in bad faith and is not so excessive as to eliminate a proper purpose. Thus, the purpose to vindicate rights in court must be central and sincere. Filing of excessive motions may sometimes constitute "harassment" under the rule even if the motions are well grounded. Likewise, filing a motion or pleading without a sincere intent to pursue it will garner sanctions.

We have previously stated that in order to determine "improper purpose," a district court must judge the conduct of counsel under an objective standard of reasonableness rather than assessing subjective intent. In other words, it is not enough that the injured party subjectively believes that a lawsuit was brought to harass, or to focus negative publicity on the injured party; instead, such improper purposes must be derived from the motive of the signer in pursuing the suit. An opponent in a lawsuit, particularly a defendant, will nearly always subjectively feel that the lawsuit was brought for less than proper purposes; plaintiffs and defendants are not often on congenial terms at the time a suit is brought. However, a court must ignore evidence of the injured party's subjective beliefs and look for more objective evidence of the signer's purpose.

There is some paradox involved in this analysis, because it is appropriate to consider the _signer's_ subjective beliefs to determine the signer's purpose in filing suit, if such beliefs are revealed through an admission that the signer knew that the motion or pleading was baseless but filed it nonetheless. This evidence may be said to be "objective" in the sense that it can be viewed by a court without fear of misinterpretation; it does not involve difficult determinations of credibility. Circumstantial facts surrounding the filing may also be considered as evidence of the signer's purpose. Repeated filings, the outrageous nature of the claims made, or a signer's experience in a particular area of law, under which baseless claims have been made, are all appropriate indicators of an improper purpose.

The district court concluded that plaintiffs' counsel never intended to litigate this § 1983 action and that counsel filed it for publicity, to embarrass state and county officials, to use as leverage in criminal proceedings, to obtain discovery for use in criminal proceedings, and to intimidate those involved in the prosecution of Hatcher and Jacobs.

The court drew its conclusions without the aid of an evidentiary hearing, but relied upon the evidence before it. The court's first conclusion, that counsel never intended to litigate the action, is the one which most clearly supports sanctions based on a finding of improper purpose. The fact that so many allegations in the complaint lacked a basis in law or in fact strongly supports the court's finding of improper purpose. The existence of baseless allegations does not alone require a finding of improper purpose, because inexperience or incompetence may have caused their inclusion in a pleading, rather than or in addition to willfulness or deliberate choice. However, in this case counsel are clearly not inexperienced, and the number and magnitude of claims without foundation suggests that incompetence is not the cause for such allegations in the complaint. This court is left with the conclusion, drawn by the district court, that counsel wilfully included the baseless claims. If counsel wilfully files a baseless complaint, a court may properly infer that it was filed either for purposes of harassment, or some purpose other than to vindicate rights through the judicial process. We therefore affirm the district court's finding that appellants violated the improper purpose prong of Rule 11.

In addition to relying upon the complaint itself, the district court inferred an improper purpose from the timing of the filing of the complaint, on the eve of the anniversary of the takeover of _The Robesonian,_ and some time after the alleged constitutional violations began. The court also viewed with suspicion the timing and nature of the dismissal of the complaint, which occurred after Jacobs lost his extradition fight in the criminal case, and before any significant discovery might have given notice to the plaintiffs that their claims were not valid. The district court dismissed as incredible appellants' explanations for dismissal, which contended that many of the claims had become moot through a series of events. The district court found it "absurd" to think that the wide-spread conspiracy involving high-level state and public officials had suddenly become unimportant by May 2, 1989. The court noted that the basis of the complaint — the breach of the alleged no-prosecution agreement — still existed even after Hatcher's and Jacobs' guilty pleas to the state charges. The court stated that the double jeopardy claims, damage claims, and other requests for equitable relief, if ever valid, did not cease being valid. In finding improper purpose, the district court was also influenced by the outrageous nature of the claims made.

The affidavits submitted by counsel strongly disputed the court's conclusions as to the timing of the filing and of the dismissal of the suit, and claimed that no improper motive influenced the timing of events. As to the decision to dismiss, appellants argued that it was based solely on financial considerations and the necessity of devoting professional resources elsewhere. Appellants argue that many equitable claims had become moot, and that the prospect for damages on the remaining claims did not warrant the expense of continuing the suit. However, the district court's determination that these explanations are not reasonable or believable, in light of all of the evidence surrounding the filing of the complaint and the frivolous nature of the allegations made, is not clearly erroneous.

The district court noted other evidence which suggested that appellants' purpose in filing the complaint was not to vindicate plaintiffs' rights, such as appellants sending a copy of the complaint to the state judge who likely would have tried Hatcher and Jacobs in the criminal case. The court also noted a quotation reported by the media, in which Mr. Pitts allegedly suggested that the suit was dropped after the Attorney General's office showed strong opposition to the suit. The court further considered an affidavit by New York attorney Neal Rose concerning Mr. Pitts' alleged admission that the suit was commenced as leverage and lacked a factual basis, although that affidavit was contradicted by an affidavit by attorney Alan Rosenthal. In light of other evidence which supports the court's finding of improper purpose, we cannot say that it was an abuse of discretion for the court to consider these matters as additional support, even though determinations of credibility are best made after an evidentiary hearing.

In concluding that appellants had never intended to litigate their suit, the district court also concluded that circumstances surrounding the case, when viewed as a whole, supported the conclusion that appellants' primary motives in filing the complaint were to gain publicity, to embarrass state and county officials, to gain leverage in criminal proceedings, to obtain discovery for use in criminal proceedings, and to intimidate those involved in the prosecution of Hatcher and Jacobs. At least some of these motives would not warrant sanctions under the improper purpose portion of Rule 11, if appellants' central purpose in bringing suit had been to vindicate rights of the plaintiffs. Holding a press conference to announce a lawsuit, while perhaps in poor taste, is not grounds for a Rule 11 sanction, nor is a subjective hope by a plaintiff that a lawsuit will embarrass or upset a defendant, so long as there is evidence that a plaintiff's central purpose in filing a complaint was to vindicate rights through the judicial process. In this case, however, there was no proper purpose for appellants' filing of the suit, and the district court's consideration of other possible motives for the suit based on the evidence available was proper.

We have affirmed the district court's conclusion that sanctions were warranted based on the improper purpose prong of Rule 11 because it is not clearly erroneous and is supported by facts such as the baseless allegations made, appellants' legal experience, and the cumulative nature of the evidence. However, we urge district courts to exercise special caution when evaluating a signer's purpose under Rule 11. When there are issues of credibility, disputed questions of fact, and rational explanations of purpose given, an evidentiary hearing may well be necessary to resolve the issues. This is particularly true when large sanctions are being considered on the ground of improper purpose as well as failure to comply with the first two prongs of Rule 11. We do not find that the court erred in failing to hold an evidentiary hearing in this case, because the cumulative nature of the evidence, as well as our earlier findings on the frivolousness of the allegations made in the complaint and the lack of a legal or factual basis, convinces us that the court's finding of improper purpose is not clearly erroneous and would not have been altered by an evidentiary hearing.

[ * * * ]

# V

## Amount of Sanction

[ * * * ]

## B. Additional Sanctions

In addition to imposing sanctions in the amount of attorney's fees claimed by the defendants, the district court imposed sanctions in the amount of $10,000 upon each appellant based on his conduct in wilfully filing outrageous claims and appellants' "pains to publicize the allegations through the media." We believe this sanction was error. Rule 11 does not confine courts to any maximum monetary sanction, nor does it even require courts to restrict themselves to monetary penalties. However, Rule 11 must be accorded its plain meaning. The text of the Rule clearly pertains only to a "pleading, motion, or other paper." Rule 11 does not encompass all conduct within judicial proceedings, and it clearly does not reach conduct outside of the judicial process. In this case, it appears the court imposed sanctions in part based on appellants' publication of their baseless claims through the media. While such publication may not be actionable as libel or slander, and is reprehensible, Rule 11 was clearly not designed to encompass such conduct.

[ * * * ]

# VII

# Conclusion

In sum, we affirm the findings of the district court which led to the imposition of Rule 11 sanctions in this case against plaintiffs' attorneys. However, we vacate the sanction imposed, because it was based on improper considerations and the size of the sanction required the district court to allow sanctioned counsel an opportunity to respond, at least to the fee statements on which the sanction was based. On remand, the district court should consider the factors which we have adopted prior to determining the sanction which should be imposed.

Affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded with instructions. 

[^2]: [Note 2 in opinion.] Pitts has never denied making the statement. If an attorney states that a particular claim is groundless, then that statement is strong evidence for the imposition of Rule 11 sanctions. However, a statement reported in the press should never be the basis for sanctions; rather, to be a basis for sanctions, the statement should appear either in an affidavit, in other reliable testimony, or in a statement by counsel in court. In this case, the reported statement was that the state charges did not "technically" constitute double jeopardy.