---
layout: case

course: Civil Procedure 
title: 'Sevier v. Lowenthal'
cite: '302 F.Supp.3d 312'
jurisdiction: 'D.D.C.'
published: '2018'
judge: "Randolph D. Moss, United States District Judge"
    
---

# Memorandum Opinion 

Plaintiff Chris Sevier, proceeding _pro se,_ seeks the removal of "the Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flag" from "the halls and public access way[s] of Federal legislative buildings." "[H]omosexuality," he says, "is a religion," which the public display of the gay pride flag impermissibly favors. According to Sevier, display of the flag violates the Establishment Clause, discourages him from lobbying Congress, and violates his rights to equal protection and substantive due process. Sevier has made similar claims in, by his count, "more than [fifteen]" other lawsuits. In addition, Sevier asks that the Court "declare that the holdings in _United States v. Windsor,_ ... and _Obergefell v. Hodges,_ ... are intellectually dishonest and amount to acts of judicial tyranny and judicial malpractice." 

Currently pending before the Court are Defendants' motion to dismiss, Sevier's motion for leave to amend his complaint, a motion to intervene,[^1] and numerous other motions. For the reasons explained below, the Court will GRANT Defendants' motion to dismiss [ … ].

# I. Background

Sevier's complaint consists largely of his views regarding homosexuality and criticisms of the Supreme Court's _Obergefell_ decision. It also recounts Sevier's efforts to "put[] [_Obergefell_] to the test" by marrying inanimate objects. The present action appears to focus, however, on the following allegations: Defendants, who are four members of the U.S. House of Representatives, have allegedly "authorized and installed [one or more] Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flag[s]" in the hallways outside their offices, which Sevier "frequently encounter[s]". Given Sevier's "religious worldview" that "homosexuality is obscene, immoral, [and] subversive to human flourishing," he "[i]s offended by [the flags'] presence". The flags, he says, make him "feel[] unwelcome[]," because he does not "adhere to [Defendants'] particular religious orthodoxy".

The "religious ideology" that Sevier has in mind is homosexuality itself. He contends that "the [h]omosexual church" is "the largest denomination" of "the overall church of western expressive individualism postmodern moral relativism," which posits that "nobody's version of morality as a basis of law matters except for the private moral code that [the adherent] personally advocat[es]," In Sevier's view, then, the gay pride flag "is a 'religious symbol' for the homosexual denomination," and its "placement ... amounts to [Defendants'] endorsement of a particular religion".

The public display of these flags, moreover, allegedly "treats different sects within the church of moral relativism with different degrees of favorability." Sevier says he belongs to "a less popular sect" of the church of moral relativism, which he calls the "machinist sect[]". As a "machinist," Sevier's "sex-based self-asserted identity narrative is that he prefers to be married to an inanimate object." So, according to Sevier, unless Defendants "install a flag that represents people who self-identify as polygamists, machinists, zoophiles, and heterosexuals," their actions "treat ... the homosexual denomination of ... the church of moral relativism with disproportionate favor".

Based on these allegations, Sevier alleges violations of the Establishment, Equal Protection, and Due Process clauses. He seeks an injunction requiring that Defendants remove the flags, or, in the alternative, "fly the [f]lags that represent the people in the zoophile, polygamy, and machinism sects [of] the overall church of moral relativism." He also seeks declaratory judgments that (1) Defendants' display of the flags "is unconstitutional;" (2) that _Obergefell_ and _Windsor_ are "intellectually dishonest ... acts of judicial tyranny and judicial malpractice;" and (3) that "homosexuality is a 'religion'... [that the] government cannot legally recognize."

Sevier's initial lawsuit was filed on March 23, 2017, he filed a motion for summary judgment. On August 15, 2017, John Gunter Jr., Whitney Kohl, and Joan Grace Harley — "three self-identified polygamists" who appear to be coordinating with Sevier in this and other cases — moved to intervene as of right under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 24(a)(2), or alternatively, to intervene permissively under Rule 24(b)(1)(B). Gunter, Kohl, and Harley allege Equal Protection, Due Process, and Establishment Clause claims that are similar in form to those advanced by Sevier, although their allegations of injury focus even more on their opposition to gay marriage generally and their "feel[ing] deeply offended" by "[t]he Defendants['] display of the gay pride flag for self-serving political reasons." 

On September 22, 2017, Defendants—four members of the House of Representatives who have displayed the flags outside their offices—moved to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) on the grounds that Sevier lacks standing and that the case presents a nonjusticiable political question; under Rule 12(b)(5) for insufficient service of process; and under Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim. They ask also that the Court treat their motion to dismiss as an opposition to the motion to intervene and Sevier's motion for summary judgment. Because Defendants' motion raises a number of threshold issues, the Court denied Sevier's motion for summary judgment as premature, and ordered him to respond to Defendants' motion to dismiss. Instead, he filed two "affidavits" in support of his complaint. Then, on October 2, 2017, he moved to stay these proceedings pending the resolution of his motion to intervene in _Masterpiece Cakeshop, Ltd. v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission,_ a case currently before the Supreme Court. The Court denied that motion, and Sevier continued to file affidavits in support of his complaint. On October 7, 2017, Sevier filed a "motion for the court to make an expedited ruling on the intervention motion." Although not styled as such, this document responds to the arguments made in Defendants' motion to dismiss.

[ * * * ]

# II. Legal Standard

## A. Motion to Dismiss Under [ * * * ] 12(b)(6)

[ * * * ]

Defendants have also moved to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). Such a motion is designed to "test[] the legal sufficiency of a complaint." _Browning v. Clinton,_ 292 F.3d 235, 242 (D.C. Cir. 2002). In evaluating such a motion, the Court "must first 'tak[e] note of the elements a plaintiff must plead to state [the] claim' to relief, and then determine whether the plaintiff has pleaded those elements with adequate factual support to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" _Blue v. District of Columbia,_ 811 F.3d 14, 20 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (quoting _Iqbal,_ 556 U.S. at 675, 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937) (alterations in original) (citation omitted). The Court need not accept as true legal conclusions disguised as factual allegations, "'naked assertions' devoid of 'further factual enhancement,'" or a "'formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action.'" _Iqbal,_ 556 U.S. at 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937. The plaintiff, however, is entitled to "the benefit of all inferences that can be derived from the facts alleged." _See_ _Am. Nat'l Ins. Co. v. FDIC,_ 642 F.3d 1137, 1139 (D.C. Cir. 2011).

[ * * * ]

# III. Analysis

## A. Motion to Dismiss

[ * * * ] [Defendants] contend that Sevier has failed to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. Fourth, they argue that the complaint is frivolous and should be dismissed under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2). The Court first addresses its subject matter jurisdiction, before turning to the merits.

The Court will [ … ] grant the motion to dismiss because Sevier has failed to state a claim for a violation of the Establishment, Equal Protection, or Due Process clauses. 

[The Court expressed uncertainty surrounding the applicable test for "Establishment Clause challenges to religious displays in or near government buildings," citing  _Lemon v. Kurtzman,_ 403 U.S. 602 (1971) and _Van Orden v. Perry,_ 545 U.S. 677, 686 (2005), but concluded that Sevier's claim failed under either test.] 

[ * * * ] Under Lemon, government actions must "(1) have a secular legislative purpose; (2) have a principal or primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion; and (3) not result in excessive entanglement with religion or religious institutions." _In re Navy Chaplaincy,_ 738 F.3d at 430 (quoting Bonham v. D.C. Library Admin., 989 F.2d 1242, 1244 (D.C. Cir. 1993)). The _Van Orden_ plurality held that "the nature of the [religious display] and ... our Nation's history" were the only relevant considerations. 545 U.S. at 686. Both approaches thus require that a plaintiff, as an initial matter, identify a government display that could reasonably be understood as "religious" in character. 

Sevier has not cleared this initial hurdle. His claim rests on the premise that "homosexuality is a religion" within the meaning of the Establishment Clause. Elsewhere he describes homosexuality as a "sect/denomination of the 'sex-based self-asserted' religion of 'western postmodern expressive individualism moral relativism.'" Sevier offers no legal support for this proposition. Instead, he has presented the Court with thousands of pages of news clippings and affidavits from his supporters expressing their opposition to homosexuality, and more recently, with filings from other litigation in which he alleges similar injuries. To be sure, the governing case law does not precisely define the contours of what constitutes "religion." But that does not mean there are no easy cases. To the contrary, courts are well-equipped to weed out spurious Establishment Clause "religions" on grounds of common sense. _See, e.g.,_ _Daniel Chapter One,_ 405 Fed.Appx. at 506 (rejecting "scientism"); _Peloza v. Capistrano Unified Sch. Dist.,_ 37 F.3d 517, 520-21 (9th Cir. 1994) (rejecting "evolutionism," i.e., the view that "higher life forms evolved from lower ones"); _United States v. Allen,_ 760 F.2d 447, 449-51 (2d Cir. 1985) (rejecting "nuclearism," i.e., the view that nuclear weapons are "sacred objects"); _see also_ _Altman v. Bedford Cent. Sch. Dist.,_ 245 F.3d 49, 79 (2d Cir. 2001) (holding that an "objective observer" would not consider a public school's celebration of Earth Day to be a religious endorsement).

Common sense similarly forecloses Sevier's claim here. Whatever else religion might entail, it at minimum requires adherence to one or more fundamental beliefs. "Homosexuality," by contrast, is not a set of beliefs at all. It is a description of a person's sexual orientation. Similarly, the argument that acceptance of homosexuality constitutes a "religion"—if that is what Sevier means to assert—also fails. The gay rights movement bears no trappings of "religion" as that concept is widely understood, and Sevier has not plausibly alleged that a reasonable person would perceive the display of the rainbow flags as religious in nature. That Sevier's own beliefs may derive from his religion does not transform any contrary view of the subject into religious expression. Sevier does make passing reference to "secular humanism," "moral relativism," "individualism," and other concepts that could conceivably constitute a set of religious beliefs for the purposes of an Establishment Clause claim. He has not, however, alleged any plausible link between those more general moral philosophies and the "Gay Pride Rainbow Colored Flags" he argues have actually caused his injury, leaving his claims untethered from anything resembling a religion for Establishment Clause purposes. 

In short, Sevier's argument proves way too much. If the mere acceptance of homosexuality — or support for gay rights — constitutes a "religion" for Establishment Clause purposes, then the same conclusion would presumably follow for any value judgment about how people should or should not live their lives. The Establishment Clause's meaning is not so capacious. [ * * * ] Because "homosexuality" or support for gay rights is not a "religion" in any meaningful sense under the Establishment Clause, Sevier's Establishment Clause claim fails as a matter of law.

Although all of Sevier's claims appear to rely on this premise, his equal protection and due process claims fail for other reasons as well. Both merely reiterate Sevier's view (expressed in other lawsuits) that the Constitution gives him the right to marry his computer. The only relevance these allegations have to his present lawsuit—which again, seeks the removal of gay pride flags—is that those flags "remind[]" him that he cannot presently marry his computer. Even without passing on Sevier's right to human-laptop marriage, it is safe to say that government activities that remind Sevier of his alleged constitutional injury do not create new constitutional injuries in their own right. These claims, accordingly, will be dismissed for lack of standing. Finally, this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain Sevier's request for a declaratory judgment that Obergefell and Windsor amount to "acts of judicial tyranny." This claim presents no case or controversy. Opining on the judicial propriety of these cases would have no effect on any of the even potentially cognizable allegations of injury made by Sevier. It goes without saying, moreover, that it is not the role of this Court — or any lower court — to review the merits of binding Supreme Court precedent.

For these reasons, the Court will grant Defendants' motion to dismiss.

--- 

[^1]: Editor's Note: The court's discussion of the Motion to Intervene [is here]({{ site.baseurl }}/cases/Sevier_Lowenthal_Intervention). 